COOKERY FOR LITTLE GIRLS
MUFFINS
Then next try muffins. Have her sift two cups
of flour, one teaspoon of salt, and two teaspoons
of baking powder. Add one cup of milk, two ta-
blespoons of melted butter, and two eggs, with
the stiff whites last Bake in buttered muffin
tins fifteen or twenty minutes in a hot oven.
GRIDDLE
CAKES
If successful with these things, she will be quite
sure with a little care to make good griddle cakes.
Have her sift two cups of flour with two teaspoons
of baking powder, half a teaspoon of salt, a ta-
blespoon of sugar, and stir in the yolks of two
eggs, well beaten, and a cup and a half of milk.
When perfectly smooth, and just before baking,
fold in the stiff whites. Grease a hot griddle with
a piece of suct, put down a spoonful of batter at
a time, and turn as soon as it bubbles well over
the top. Watch carefully to keep from burning,
but never turn a pancake the second time.
After a girl has learned how to make biscuit
and other light breads, she should be shown at
once how to prepare eggs in different ways so that
she will be able at any time to serve a dainty
breakfast.
6
CREAMED EGGS ON TOAST
BOILED EGGS
I
To boil an egg would seem to be the easiest
matter possible, but it requires care just the same.
Scarcely any two people in a family like eggs
cooked the same length of time, and so, after
ascertaining the way each one prefers, have the
water boiling hard, and then check by adding a
little cold water so that the shells will not crack
from the heat. Put in the eggs carefully with a
tablespoon, to prevent striking each other, boil
the required number of minutes and remove each
when its time is up, sending to the table at once.
Hard boiled eggs, to be digestible, should be kept
just at the boiling point for thirty minutes. The
yolks will then be mealy.
7
COOKERY FOR LITTLE GIRLS
POACHED EGGS
Poached eggs should be dropped in buttered gem
pans and then set in a deep dripping-pan and
covered with boiling water. When boiled as long
as desired, lift gently on to rounds of buttered
toast, sprinkle with salt and pepper, garnish with
parsley or small celery leaves and serve on a hot
platter.
PLAIN OMELET
For an omelet for four people, separate yolks
and whites of five eggs. Beat yolks very light,
add one-quarter teaspoonful salt, pepper, five ta
blespoonfuls milk, and lastly the whites, beaten
very stiff. Mix lightly, but thoroughly, and pour
in well-buttered hot frying-pan, place on stove
about two minutes until well puffed up, then put
in oven for a moment until firm on top. On re-
moving, fold omelet over with a cake-turner, place
on a hot plate and garnish with parsley.
FANCY OMELETS
After the little daughter has mastered this pop-
ular dish, show her how to make it into a fancy
one by adding various things. A small quantity
(half a cupful) cf chopped ham stirred in before
8
GOOD THINGS FOR BREAKFAST
cooking, converts it into a ham omelet, a cupful
of cold boiled rice mixed thoroughly through the
uncooked eggs, a rice omelet, while a cupful of
chopped meat-or better, chopped chicken-will
make a meat or chicken omelet. A delicious green
corn omelet has the pulp from two ears of green
corn, grated from the cob, added just before
cooking. This should be given a slower fire and
more time. For a cheese omelet, sprinkle half ει
cupful of grated cheese over the eggs after they
are cooked before folding over.
OMELET
GARNISHING
The wise mother will suggest to the young cook
that instead of always using one recipe she try to
think of some way of improving or varying it.
A few green peas left from dinner can be made
hot and sprinkled over an omelet the same way
as the cheese, or the cup of stewed tomatoes
left from the day before be strained, thickened
with a teaspoonful of flour, seasoned with butter,
pepper and salt, and served as a sauce, this mak-
ing a delicious accompaniment to a plain omelet.
CREAMED
EGGS
Take the desired number of hot hard-boiled
eggs, cut in quarters, lay on pieces of hot but-
9
COOKERY FOR LITTLE GIRLS
This
tered toast, and cover with white sauce.
makes a most appetizing dish for breakfast or
luncheon. Garnish with parsley.
DEVILLED
EGGS
Put on in hot water, simmer for half an hour,
then place in cold water to loosen shells. When
cold, cut in half, remove yolks, mash, and season
with salt, pepper, a dash of prepared mustard,
and a teaspoonful of vinegar, with a half tea-
spoonful of soft butter for each egg. Rub to a
smooth paste, and pack back in the whites. For
picnics, fasten two halves together with a wooden
toothpick.
SCRAMBLED
EGGS
Beat the desired number enough to break the
yolks, season with salt and pepper, and add a ta-
blespoonful of milk for each egg. Put in a hot
pan half a teaspoonful of butter for each egg, and
when melted, pour in the beaten eggs. Stir con-
stantly, scraping from the bottom of the pan
until 
cooked enough to suit individual taste, but
watch closely, for the longer they cook the drier
they become. Garnish with parsley or with dried
beef, frizzled in a hot skillet with a small quan-
tity of butter.
10
GOOD THINGS FOR BREAKFAST
BACON AND EGGS
Place thin slices of bacon in a hot skillet, turn
frequently to keep from curling, and remove to a
hot plate when cooked as much as desired. Break
eggs in a saucer, one at a time, to see that they
are fresh, then drop gently into the hot fat. When
done to suit individual taste, lift carefully to the
center of a hot platter, and garnish with the
bacon.
The secret of an attractive table, which should
be made clear to every girl, is clean linen, with
dishes and silver carefully arranged. Each ar-
ticle of food, however simple, should be carefully
placed in the center of its dish, and vegetables,
meats and salads garnished with parsley, celery
leaves, or occasionally rings of hard-boiled eggs.
The eggs are especially nice on salads and on
such a vegetable as spinach.
A kitchen lesson would be incomplete without a
few words regarding the care of the all-impor-
tant dish-towels and dish-cloth. However many
may be on hand, it is a wise plan to teach the lit-
tle cook to take warm water and plenty of soap
and wash them out each time, being careful to
rinse them thoroughly after she is through. Then
hang out in the air to dry.
11
CHAPTER IV
Fish, Fresh and Dried
Fresh fish, in the first place, must be absolutely
fresh. They will have little odor, the eyes will be
full and clear, and the flesh firm. They are usually
delivered from the market cleaned and scaled, but
they should be washed with cold water, and sprin-
kled with salt if not used immediately.
SMELTS, TROUT AND PERCH
Smelts, trout, perch and other small fish, are
fried whole, while the larger kinds are cut in pieces
called fillets. After washing, drying and season-
ing with pepper and salt, each piece should be
dipped in finely rolled, dried bread or corn meal,
and laid on the bread-board. When all through,
beginning with the first, dip each one in well-
beaten, seasoned egg, and then in the crumbs
again, taking pains to have them covered com-
pletely. Lay back on the board to dry before
cooking. Heat a half cupful of lard in a skillet
31
COOKERY FOR LITTLE GIRLS
until smoking hot, then put in the fish and fry on
one side until brown. Turn carefully to avoid
breaking, and brown on the other side, but do
not turn more than once, and watch to keep from
burning. Many cooks use flour or rolled crackers
for covering the fish, but the bread crumbs do
not hold as much grease, and the fish always seem
to fry better than when dipped in anything else.
When cooked a deep, rich brown, lift out on to
brown paper to drain, and then slip on to a hot
platter and send to the table at once, garnished
with slices of lemon, parsley or water cress.
HALIBUT
A halibut steak is fine when, after washing
thoroughly, it is put in a dripping pan, seasoned
with salt and pepper, covered with boiling water
and cooked in the oven until done, from twenty
minutes to half an hour. While it is cooking, our
little maid can prepare her favorite white sauce,
only now she must add a cupful of strained toma-
toes and season with red pepper. When the fish
is ready, she must serve it on a hot platter, cov-
ered with the hot sauce. A steak of this kind
usually weighs about two pounds, and is ample
for four or five people.
32
-1-
FISH, FRESH AND DRIED
WHITE, WEAK AND BLUE
FISH
White fish, weak fish, blue fish and similar kinds
I like best when large enough to have the bones
first removed and the fish then spread, skin down,
on a wire broiler, or an oak plank. Spread with a
little butter and seasoned with pepper and salt, it
may be cooked in a gas stove or before a hot fire.
This will take from twenty to thirty minutes.
When thoroughly done and browned on top, gar-
nish with roses of mashed potato, lemon or pars-
ley, and serve immediately, right on the plank
if desired. Any left over can be picked into small
pieces, and worked up with an equal amount of
cold mashed potato, into cakes, to be fried for
breakfast.
There are many kinds of smoked and canned
fish that make specially appetizing dishes for
breakfast or luncheon. They should always be
kept in the house, with other shelf supplies, and
will prove " a friend in need."
FINNAN HADDIE
Finnan Haddie can be served in several ways.
After washing and wiping off with a cloth, it can
be buttered, seasoned with salt and pepper and
33
COOKERY FOR LITTLE GIRLS
either broiled or fried. Or it is even better if
boiled first for five minutes (put on it cold water),
then picked into small flakes and stirred into our
little maid's standby, white sauce. After cooking
five minutes longer, it should be served on rounds
of hot buttered toast, garnished with parsley.
SMOKED FISH
Smoked halibut, salmon and sturgeon can all be
bought in small pieces (even as little as half a
pound), and are most inviting when cut into thin
slices and made hot in a skillet with just enough
butter to keep them from burning.
SALT COD
But in talking of dried fish, we must not forget
our old favorite, creamed codfish. As the boxed
codfish is always so salty, it is necessary, after
picking it carefully apart and removing the bones,
to let it soak in cold water for half an hour, then
drain. Put half a cupful of fish on in a stewpan,
cover with cold water and let come to a boil. Pour
this off immediately, cover with fresh boiling wa-
ter, and let gently simmer for ten minutes. While
it is cooking, our small maid should rub to a
smooth paste one tablespoon of flour and one ta-
blespoon of butter. Then adding one cup of milk
and one well-beaten egg to the codfish, she next
84
CHAPTER V
Simple Meat Dishes
Here let me put in a few words about some easy
ways of cooking meat. The recipes are simple,
but everything depends on your getting in plenty
of seasoning, cooking as directed, and not burn-
ing. Be sure to have veal, lamb and pork well
done, as no one likes these rare or even pink, but
study the family taste about the length of time to
cook beef. I have purposely omitted the ordinary
dinner meats (I couldn't tell you everything in
one tittle book!), but if you learn to make what
I do tell you about, you will certainly become a
good cook.
PAN-BROILED LAMB CHOPS
Lamb chops are particularly nice pan-broiled.
First scrape off any fine particles of bone, trim
off superfluous fat, and then place in a hissing
hot skillet. Turn often until well seared, to pre-
vent escape of juices, and cook until brown, about
ten minutes. Serve on a hot platter, season with
37
COOKERY FOR LITTLE GIRLS
salt and pepper, dot with butter, and garnish
with varsley, peas, or a ring of mashed potatoes.
PORK CHOPS
Pork chops need to be thoroughly cooked, and
after washing, I always parboil ten minutes first
in a covered frying pan, then season with salt and
pepper and brown in fat. They are often served
with tomato sauce.
VEAL CUTLET AS REED BIRDS
VEAL
CUTLETS
The veal for this purpose, sometimes called
Mock Reed Birds, should be sliced thin, then cut
in four-inch squares. Spread lightly with butter,
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and scatter with
finely minced parsley and celery, or either one
alone. Roll each piece up tightly and tie with a
38
SIMPLE MEAT DISHES
piece of white string. Place "birds" in a hot
skillet with a little water and melted butter, 
cover
and simmer for twenty minutes, then brown in
butter or fat as preferred. Serve on rounds of hot
buttered toast, with brown gravy.
BEEF STEW (BROWN)
Take one pound of round steak, cut in small
pieces and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Put a
little suct in a hot kettle, or melt two tablespoons
of butter, and add a couple of slices of dry onion,
turning frequently until brown, then put in the
meat. Stir to keep from scorching until well
seared on all sides, cover with boiling water, and
set on the back of the stove to simmer for at
least three hours. As it boils down, allow to brown
before filling up again, and have the meat covered
with the broth when done. Thicken with two
tablespoons of flour stirred to a smooth paste in
half a cup of cold water. Add more salt then if
necessary. Send to the table in a covered dish.
and serve with mashed potatoes.
SOUTHERN BAKED HAM
When there is going to be company, baked ham
is one of the nicest kinds of meat that can be
39
COOKERY FOR LITTLE GIRLS
had. Take either a small end or half a ham, as
needed, and soak several hours in cold water.
Wash well and put on in a kettle with cold water
to cover and boil slowly, allowing at least twenty
minutes to the pound. After boiling half an
hour, remove one-third the water, and fill up with
fresh boiling water, and keep covered until done.
Then set aside and allow to cool in the liquor.
When cold, lift out, trim off the brown skin, cover
the fat with brown sugar, stick with whole cloves,
and bake brown about twenty or thirty min-
utes. This is delicious either hot or cold.
BEEFSTEAK
Different kinds of steak need to be cooked in
different ways. Tenderloin, porterhouse, and sir-
loin are best broiled over a hot fire, or pan broiled
by being turned frequently on a very hot skillet,
with only the fat that comes from the steak itself.
Serve on a hot platter, with butter, pepper and
salt. Round steak is nice cut in small pieces, sea-
soned with salt and pepper, rolled in flour, and
cooked quickly in some of the suct, first put in the
pan until tried out. Lift browned pieces of the
steak (for this needs more cooking than tenderer
meat), on to a hot platter, add a little butter to
40
SIMPLE MEAT DISHES
the fat in the pan, stir in a scant tablespoon of
flour, stir well until smooth and brown, then pour
in quickly a cupful of cold water, and continue to
stir until well thickened. This gravy will be
smooth and of nice flavor, and can be poured over
the meat. Season, of course, with salt and pep-
per to taste.
HASH
Hash, though a dish often laughed at, is al-
ways appetizing when well made. Corn beef hash
indeed has quite a reputation, and is made by
chopping cold corn beef rather fine, adding an
equal quantity of cold boiled potatoes, chopped,
wetting with enough boiling water to keep from
burning, seasoning with salt, pepper and a little
butter, and then allowing to cook gently for at
least twenty minutes. All kinds of hash need to
simmer for quite a while, in order to blend the
navor of the meat and the potatoes, and give the
delicate taste that marks a carefully prepared
dish, Beef, particularly browned scraps, finely
minced, and mixed with an equal quantity of
minced cold boiled potatoes, seasoned and pre-
pared as just directed, is very good for breakfast
served on rounds of buttered toast. And either
41
